---
id: lit2q7wewb1b91nqdu2wivn
title: On Legal Capacity and Its Relation between Lochia and Menstruation
desc: >-
  Legal capacity plays an significant role in the establishment of
  responsibility over the *mahkūm alayh*, which itself is central to discussions
  in legal theory (Usūl al-Fiqh). Some types of legal capacities are subject to
  change due to external factors that affect an individual and their
  relationship with The Lawgiver and other human beings. This paper introduces
  legal capacities, menstruation, lochia, and the effect the latter two have on
  the former.
updated: 1706735491281
created: 1706734506566
tags:
  - usul-fiqh
  - essays
author: huscous
---

[Bib file](studies.usul-fiqh.essay.on-legal-capacity-and-its-relation-between-lochia-and-menstruation.bib-file.md) to export into LaTeX

> بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم\>

> ونصلي على رسوله الكريم\>

# Legal Capacity: Definitions, its Types, and its Reducing Factors

A *hukm* (pl. *Ahkām*) literally means to know, to have understanding
of, or insight into, a thing [@majma_al-lughah_al-arabiyah_mujam_1972].
By secondary indication, it means ruling by justice, which best suits
the discussion at hand [@ibn_manzur_mujam_711]. Technically, as
mentioned in the Sanūsiyyah, rulings are of three types: rational,
normative, and legal[^1] [@as-sanusi_sharh_895]. Legal rulings are
established by communication from the Lawgiver upon the *mukallaf* - a
person who is in full possession of his faculties. This communication
can be definitive or speculative[^2], either in its meaning or
interpretation[^3] [@kamali_principles_2003].

> وإذ أخذ ربك من بني آدم\>

> وحملها الإنسان\>

*Taklīf* (legal responsibility) arises due to an individual having legal
capacity, whether active or receptive[^4] [@al-asadi_taklif_2010].
Receptive legal capacity is defined as the capability of an individual
to receive rights and obligations. Its existence is determined by
presence of life as seen by indication from the verses above, and thus
incomplete (or deficient) since conception till birth, and complete post
birth [@al-ikhsikthi_fasl_2020][@al-haqqani_fasl_2020]. Examples of
rights that an embryo receives include receiving inheritance, and
estates in wills. Immediately upon birth however, the baby is able to
inherit and be inherited from.

The existence of active legal capacity however is determined through
maturity and (according to Sh. Wahbah az-Zuhaylī [^5]) has three stages
[@az-zuhayli_usul_1986] - namely non-existent, deficient, and complete
[^6] as detailed in table [1](#tab:act_leg_cap){reference-type="ref"
reference="tab:act_leg_cap"}. However, in semi-classical Hanafī Usūl
teaching texts such as Nūr al-Anwār and al-Husāmī, this taxonomy is not
found as the authors choose to opt for a binary
(complete-incomplete[^7]) classification.

By definition then, it can be deduced that with loss of life comes loss
of receptive legal capacity. On the contrary, the reduction of active
legal capacity can arise due to two sets of affects; the causes of which
can be man-made or otherwise[^8]. The basis for this is established in
the following Hadith [^9].

> رُفع القلم عن الثلاث: عن النائم حتى استيقظ،\
> وعن الصبي ختى يبلغ، وعن المعتوه حتى يعقل \>

Factors caused by God Himself (*lit. heavenly deficiencies*) are 11 in
number according to al-Husāmī including (but not limited to) immaturity,
insanity, idiocy, illness, death, menstruation and post-natal bleeding.
Factors that affect legal capacity caused by human actions are either
self-inflicted or caused by other than the individual who's capacity is
affected. These include ignorance, intoxication (self-inflicted), and
coercion (caused by others) [@al-ikhsikthi_fasl_2020]. These factors can
either completely remove legal capacity (thus absolving one from all
responsibility from a particular obligation), reduce legal capacity, or
change some legal rulings [@az-zuhayli_usul_1986].

::: {#tab:act_leg_cap}
   **Type of active capacity**  **Stage of life**                  **Comments**
  ----------------------------- ---------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------
          Non-existent          Birth till infancy                 No legal consequences (verbal or actions)
            Deficient           Age of discernment till maturity   A child (not infant), and an idiot
            Complete            Age of maturity till death         Major persons with sound intellect who is not on deathbed

  : The different stages of active legal capacity
:::

# Menstruation, Lochia and their Relation to Capacity

For both menstruation and lochia, any coloured discharge that is not
white or clear is considered (legal) bleeding. Any bleeding that does
not fit the criteria below is considered dysfunctional bleeding or
*istihādha*.

## Menstruation and Lochia

Literally, *haydh* is to menstruate [^10]. Technically, it refers to the
blood that exits from the uterus (not a vein[^11], nor blood post birth,
during pregnancy or caused by illness) through the vagina of a female at
least 9 lunar years. For bleeding to be valid, it has to occur for a
minimal amount of 3 days (72 hours) but must not exceed 10 days (240
hours), ending with white or clear discharge [@al-birgivi_dhukhr_1552].
*Nifās* (lochia) is defined similarly but occurs post delivery of most
of the baby. 2 periods of lochia are separated by a minimal clean period
of 6 months. Valid bleeding here must not exceed 40 days (960 hours)
[@al-birgivi_dhukhr_1552].

## Effects on Capacity

From a legal theory perspective, bleeding (all types) cause a change in
the ruling related to actions. They do not stop receptive legal capacity
in any way (as this is only removed by death), nor active legal capacity
(as the intellect remains sound), but there is a differing in the
rulings that apply to certain actions as established by the *Nass*
[@az-zuhayli_usul_1986].

### 'Ibādāt - Rights Pertaining to the Lawgiver

A condition[^12] to prayer is purity. As prayer is obligatory as
ordained by The Law-Giver, removal of obstructions to fulfil the
obligation also takes the same ruling. Menstruation, however is a
habitual impurity for the one who has a regular period - *'Ādah* and
not. Due to removal of hardship (*Daf' al-Haraj wa al-Mashaqqah*), the
obligation of prayer is lifted from the individual - i.e. there is no
need to perform *Qadhā'* to fulfill the obligation. This also applies to
prostrating due to recitation and gratitude. This however, does not
apply to fasting - a menstruating woman must discharge her obligation to
fast, as *Qadhā'*, as the reason (*sabab* i.e. bleeding) does not
encompass the whole month [@al-quduri_mukhasar_2020].

As for post-natal bleeding, all blood (until most of the baby is out) is
considered dysfunctional bleeding such the obligation of prayer remains
for the woman, and she can fulfil it by removing the minor impurity. As
soon as most of the baby is delivered, the conditions for the bleeding
to be considered lochia are met, and the obligation of prayer is lifted
from her [@az-zabidi_kitab_nodate].

### Mu'āmalāt - Rights Pertaining to Other Than The Lawgiver

> فاعتزلوا النساء في المحيض\>

> يتربصن بأنفسهن ثلاثة قروء\>

Rulings related to other than The Lawgiver also change due to
Menstruation. A married menstruating woman must refrain from intercourse
(only) as the *Nass* states, until she is pure. The menstruating woman
must also not be divorced whilst in her state - divorce must be
pronounced during purity periods (according the Hanafīs, who hold that
the word قروء\> in the *Nass* is a period of purity). This period of
*Iddah* also differs depending on the social class that the individual
belongs to - if she is a free woman or a bondswoman
[@al-quduri_mukhasar_2020].

To conclude, we have introduced the idea of legal capacity, how it is
affected through habitual bleeding, the changing of rulings, and briefly
explored the reasoning (from legal theory perspective) behind the
concessions (*Rukhas*) given.

[^1]: Rational rulings are an affirmation or negation of a relation
    between one thing and another thing. They are established by the
    intellect. e.g. "2 + 2 = 4\". Repeated empirical relationships that
    are observed in nature are normative/customary. e.g. "Fire burns\".

[^2]: دليل قطعي وظني\>

[^3]: الثبوت والدلالة\>

[^4]: أهلية الوجوب والأداء\>

[^5]: az-Zuhyalī is considered to be one of the greatest jurists of the
    last century. Sh. Sbini also holds that it makes sense to include a
    non-existent phase

[^6]: معدومة، ناقصة، تامة\> respectively

[^7]: قاصرة-كاملة\>

[^8]: عوارض السماوية والمكتسبة\>

[^9]: Narrated by Sayyidatuna Ā'isha (God be pleased with her)
    [@ibn_majah_kitab_4398][@an-nasai_kitab_3432]

[^10]: This is so well-known that ibn Manzūr does not define the
    *masdar* [@ibn_manzur_mujam_711]!

[^11]: This is according to Imām Abū Yūsuf [@al-kasani_kitab_nodate]

[^12]: شرط\>
